So now that you have
a good overview of how the web works
behind the scenes, let's learn
about what back-end web development actually is
and how it compares to front-end development,
because this is a very important distinction
in the web development world.
So in order to distinguish between
the front-end and the back-end
of a website and of web development
as a general, we still consider
the same client-server architecture
that we talked about before.
So in general terms, front-end development
is about everything that happens in the web browser.
So it's about designing and building
the final website that's gonna
be visible to the user, and therefore,
the name front-end.
The front-end developer uses
the basic technologies: HTML, CSS, and JavaScript,
which together form the front-end technology stack.
Now, many modern front-end developers
add more stuff to the front-end stack
like React or Angular or Redux or GraphQL
or whatever is cool these days.
So these technologies make front-end development easier
and all these technologies together
that a developer or a team decides
to use on the front-end, is their
front-end stack, okay?
And you probably already know most
of this stuff anyway, but I still wanna give you
a brief overview of how everything fits
into the bigger picture here.
All right, and now moving on to the back-end.
This part of web development is
about everything that happens on the web server,
so everything that is invisible
to the final user and therefore
the name back-end, okay?
And since we're talking about the server site now,
let's actually define what a server really is.
Well a basic server is really just a computer
that is connected to the internet
which, first, stores a website's files
like HTML, CSS, and images,
and second, runs an HTTP server
that is capable of understanding URLs,
requests, and also delivering responses.
So this piece of HTTP server software
is what actually communicates with the browser
using requests and responses.
Therefore, it is like the bridge
between the front-end and the back-end
of a website or web application.
Now a simple web server like the one
I just described is called a static server,
because all it can really do is
to serve static files to the client via HTTP.
If you just need to host a simple website,
then this is really all you need.
But if you wanna take it to the next level
and create dynamic web applications
that talk to databases and all that good stuff,
we use a server that is also capable
of running OR dynamic applications,
just like the code that we wrote
and executed in the intro section of the course.
This is then called a dynamic server,
where we have OR app running,
an HTTP server, and of course,
the files all talking to each other.
And in some cases, that's all we need
for OR applications, but usually
when we build dynamic websites or apps,
we will also use a database,
which we can access right from our applications.
By the way, if the term static
and dynamic websites or applications
are a bit confusing for you, no problem.
We will talk about that right in the next video.
Anyway, we can use the database
to store stuff like users or application data
or text to fill up a website template.
In any serious application, there will always
be a database and our back-end code
will communicate with that data base.
So, some usual stuff that is handled
on the back-end or the server side
as we can also call it to create user profiles,
perform log-in's, send emails, handle payment,
retrieve and send request data from a database
to a client, manipulate data in the database,
fill up website templates, and so much more.
And we will do many of these exciting things
throughout the course, actually all of them really.
Now about the technology as you can guess,
we are gonna use NodeJS as a dynamic web server
and MongoDB as our database,
so datas or back-end stack.
But there are so many different back-end technologies
and stacks available for the back-end.
Things like PHP with MySQL database
or Python with PostgreSQL database
or some people use Ruby on Rails
maybe with even some other database.
But, since you wanna learn NodeJS
well we are gonna use exactly that.
And the most popular database that is used
with Node is, without a doubt, MongoDB.
And, so, that is our choice for a back-end stack.
Now, you might have heard the term full stack before,
and that simply is the front-end
plus the back-end stacks together.
So, the developer that does both front-end
and back-end development can call himself
a full stack developer, but these developers
are getting increasingly rare,
especially because the front-end
is becoming more and more complex these days.
Finally, another thing that I wanted to quickly mention
is that, as you can see, we're gonna use Node
applied to back-end web development
and not something like hardware programming.
So, you can technically use Node for stuff like
flying drones, programming robots,
or developing software for IFT devices.
But, that is outside the scope of this course.
If you want to program IFT devices with Node,
well this course is still going to be useful for you,
it's just not the focus of the projects
that we are gonna build, okay?
All right and I guess that summarizes the difference
between the front-end side and the back-end side
of web development, so that going forward,
you have a good idea of the domains
where NodeDS is actually used in the real world.